//JavaScript Regex
/*In JavaScript, 
a Regular Expression (RegEx) is an object 
that describes a sequence of characters 
used for defining a search pattern. For example,*/

/^a...s$/

/*The above code defines a RegEx pattern. 
The pattern is: any five letter string starting with a 
and ending with s.

A pattern defined using RegEx can be used to match against a string. */

/*
Expression	        String	        Matched?
/^a...s$/	        abs	            No match
                    alias	        Match
                    abyss	        Match
                    Alias	        No match
                    An abacus	    No match 
*/

//============ Create a RegEx ===================
/*There are two ways you can create a regular expression in JavaScript.

1. Using a regular expression literal:
The regular expression consists of a pattern enclosed between slashes /. 
For example, */

const regularEXP1 = /abc/;

/*Here, /abc/ is a regular expression. */

/*
2. Using the RegExp() constructor function:
You can also create a regular expression 
by calling the RegExp() constructor function. 
For example, */

const regularEXP2 = new RegExp('abc');

//for example:

const regex = new RegExp(/^a...s$/);
console.log(regex.test('alias'));// Output: true

/*In the above example, 
the string alias matches with the RegEx pattern /^a...s$/. 
Here, the test() method is used to check if the string matches the pattern.

There are several other methods available to use with JavaScript RegEx. 
Before we explore them, let's learn about regular expressions themselves.

If you already know the basics of RegEx, 
jump to JavaScript RegEx Methods. */

//========= Specify Pattern Using RegEx ===========
/*To specify regular expressions, 
metacharacters are used. 
In the above example (/^a...s$/), ^ and $ are metacharacters.*/

//==MetaCharacters
/*

Metacharacters are characters that are interpreted in a special way 
by a RegEx engine. Here's a list of metacharacters:

[] . ^ $ * + ? {} () \ |

*/

//== [] - Square brackets
/*Square brackets specify a set of characters you wish to match.*/
/*
Expression	        String	        Matched?
[abc]	            a	            1 match
                    ac	            2 matches
                    Hey Jude	    No match
                    abc de ca	    5 matches
*/

/*Here, 
[abc] will match if the string you are trying to match contains 
any of the a, b or c.

You can also specify a range of characters using - inside square brackets.

[a-e] is the same as [abcde].

[1-4] is the same as [1234].

[0-39] is the same as [01239].

You can complement (invert) the character set 
by using caret ^ symbol at the start of a square-bracket.

[^abc] means any character except a or b or c.

[^0-9] means any non-digit character. */

//== . - Period

A period matches any single character (except newline '\n').

Expression	        String	        Matched?
..	                a	            No match
                    ac	            1 match
                    acd	            1 match
                    acde	        2 matches (contains 4 characters)

//== ^ - Caret

The caret symbol ^ is used to check if a string starts with a certain character.

Expression	        String	        Matched?
^a	                a	            1 match
                    abc	            1 match
                    bac	            No match
^ab	                abc	            1 match
                    acb	            No match (starts with a but not followed by b)

//== $ - Dollar

The dollar symbol $ is used to check if a string ends with a certain character.

Expression	        String	        Matched?
a$	                a	            1 match
                    formula	        1 match
                    cab	            No match

//== * - Star

The star symbol * matches zero or more occurrences of the pattern left to it.

Expression	        String	        Matched?
ma*n	            mn	            1 match
                    man	            1 match
                    mann	        1 match
                    main	        No match (a is not followed by n)
                    woman	        1 match

//== + - Plus

The plus symbol + matches one or more occurrences of the pattern left to it.

Expression	        String	        Matched?
ma+n	            mn	            No match (no a character)
                    man	            1 match
                    mann	        1 match
                    main	        No match (a is not followed by n)
                    woman	        1 match

//== ? - Question Mark

The question mark symbol ? matches zero or one occurrence of the pattern left to it.

Expression	        String	    Matched?
ma?n	            mn	        1 match
                    man	        1 match
                    maan	    No match (more than one a character)
                    main	    No match (a is not followed by n)
                    woman	    1 match

//== {} - Braces

Consider this code: {n,m}. This means at least n, and at most m repetitions of the pattern left to it.

Expression	    String	    Matched?
a{2,3}	        abc dat	    No match
                abc daat	1 match (at daat)
                aabc daaat	2 matches (at aabc and daaat)
                aabc daaaat	2 matches (at aabc and daaaat)

Let's try one more example. This RegEx [0-9]{2, 4} matches at least 2 digits but not more than 4 digits.

Expression	        String	        Matched?
[0-9]{2,4}	        ab123csde	    1 match (match at ab123csde)
                    12 and 345673	3 matches (12, 3456, 73)
                    1 and 2	        No match

//== | - Alternation

Vertical bar | is used for alternation (or operator).

Expression	        String	    Matched?
a|b	                cde	        No match
                    ade	        1 match (match at ade)
                    acdbea	    3 matches (at acdbea)

Here, a|b match any string that contains either a or b

//== () - Group

Parentheses () is used to group sub-patterns. For example, (a|b|c)xz match any string that matches either a or b or c followed by xz

Expression	        String	    Matched?
(a|b|c)xz	        ab xz	    No match
                    abxz	    1 match (match at abxz)
                    axz cabxz	2 matches (at axzbc cabxz)

//== \ - Backslash

Backslash \ is used to escape various characters including all metacharacters. For example,

\$a match if a string contains $ followed by a. Here, $ is not interpreted by a RegEx engine in a special way.

If you are unsure if a character has special meaning or not, you can put \ in front of it. This makes sure the character is not treated in a special way.


//============= Special Sequences ===================
Special sequences make commonly used patterns easier to write. Here's a list of special sequences:

\A - Matches if the specified characters are at the start of a string.

Expression	        String	    Matched?
\Athe	            the sun	    Match
                    In the sun	No match

\b - Matches if the specified characters are at the beginning or end of a word.

Expression	        String	        Matched?
\bfoo	            football 	    Match
                    a football	    Match
foo\b	            a football	    No match
                    the foo	        Match
                    the afoo test	Match
                    the afootest	No match

\B - Opposite of \b. Matches if the specified characters are not at the beginning or end of a word.

Expression	        String	        Matched?
\Bfoo	            football 	    No match
                    a football	    No match
foo\B	            a football	    Match
                    the foo	        No match
                    the afoo test	No match
                    the afootest	Match

\d - Matches any decimal digit. Equivalent to [0-9]

Expression	        String	       Matched?
\d	                12abc3	        3 matches (at 12abc3)
                    JavaScript	    No match
\D - Matches any non-decimal digit. Equivalent to [^0-9]

Expression	    String	    Matched?
\D	            1ab34"50	3 matches (at 1ab34"50)
                1345	    No match

\s - Matches where a string contains any whitespace character. Equivalent to [ \t\n\r\f\v].

Expression	    String	            Matched?
\s	            JavaScript RegEx	1 match
                JavaScriptRegEx	    No match

\S - Matches where a string contains any non-whitespace character. Equivalent to [^ \t\n\r\f\v].

Expression	        String	    Matched?
\S	                a b	        2 matches (at a b)
 	                            No match

\w - Matches any alphanumeric character (digits and alphabets). Equivalent to [a-zA-Z0-9_]. By the way, underscore _ is also considered an alphanumeric character.

Expression	    String	    Matched?
\w	            12&": ;c	3 matches (at 12&": ;c)
                %"> !	    No match

\W - Matches any non-alphanumeric character. Equivalent to [^a-zA-Z0-9_]

Expression	    String	    Matched?
\W	            1a2%c	    1 match (at 1a2%c)
                JavaScript	No match

\Z - Matches if the specified characters are at the end of a string.

Expression	    String	                        Matched?
JavaScript\Z	I like JavaScript	            1 match
                I like JavaScript Programming	No match
                JavaScript is fun	            No match
                
Tip: To build and test regular expressions, you can use RegEx tester tools such as regex101. This tool not only helps you in creating regular expressions, but it also helps you learn it.

Now you understand the basics of RegEx, let's discuss how to use RegEx in your JavaScript code.



